Lumni Spark is the most
beginner-friendly AI agent out there.
So, if you've heard of Cloud Co-Work,
Codeex, or OpenClaw, but found those too
intimidating, you are in the right
place. In this video, we break down the
four key capabilities of Gemini Spark,
each with real world use cases, so that
by the end, you'll know exactly how and
when to use Gemini Spark. Let's get
started. First, let's quickly go over
the differences between Gemini the
chatbot and Gemini Spark. When it comes
to file management, Gemini Chat can find
and summarize files in our Google Drive,
but it struggles with other basic tasks
like renaming files and moving them to
the correct folders. Gemini Spark, on
the other hand, can detect whenever a
new file is uploaded to a folder, rename
it based on what's inside, and move it
to the right location, which basically
means your Google Drive is self-cleing.
Second, Gemini Chat can easily produce a
well-written report in Google Docs, but
you still have to ask for it every time.
Gemini Spark can autonomously build that
same report on a daily or weekly
schedule. Third, although I can use the
at@gmail command to triage my inbox and
ask Gemini Chat to summarize my emails
and prepare replies, it uses a different
formatting every time and can't take
basic actions like archiving emails or
applying labels. With Gemini Spark, I
have a triage workflow that runs on its
own, formats each summary top down the
way I like it, proposes labels to add,
and can archive irrelevant emails
automatically. Put simply, Gemini Chat
is more reactive. It answers when you
ask for something. Gemini Spark is more
proactive. It actually goes and does the
work. Now, when Spark becomes available
for you, there are two things you need
to do. First, head on into Gemini
settings, personal intelligence, and
turn on memory. This lets Spark remember
your preferences and learn how you work.
And while we're here, go into connected
apps and make sure the toggles for
Google Workspace and Search Services are
enabled. And by the way, you'll only see
the personal intelligence option in your
personal Google account. If you're using
the enterprise version, you'll only see
the connected apps tab. Click into it
and just make sure the Google Workspace
toggle is enabled, which gives Spark
direct access to our Gmail, Google
Calendar, and Google Drive. Second, head
on into Google Drive and create a folder
called Spark OS in the root of your
MyRive. And you'll see how this comes
into play later on. All right,
capability number one, connect the dots.
Diving right into an example related to
soccer. What was that? Soccer. So,
okay. Example related to football. I
tell Spark to create a spreadsheet of
every match in this year's World Cup
with the date and both teams. then pull
the transcript from my recent meeting
with Elon Husky and Satcha Nutella and
add their predicted winners to the
spreadsheet. Here's why this example is
a great illustration of Spark's first
capability. Create a spreadsheet tells
it to make a Google sheet in my Google
Drive. This year's World Cup means it
has to search the web to find the full
schedule. And pull the transcript from
my recent meeting means it has to search
my calendar and grab the meeting
transcript. Then it stitches all of that
into one spreadsheet without me opening
a single app. This is the power of
Spark's native integration within all
our Google apps. This is a very silly
analogy, but the easiest way to
understand what Spark can do is to
imagine the search bars from Google
Drive, Google Calendar, Gmail, and
Google Search all merged into one omni
box with a virtual assistant behind that
omni box who can take action on your
behalf. Moving on to a work-related
example. This time I tell Spark to
review my latest email thread with
Austin. Then create a calendar invite
for a quick catch up on October 1st in
the same time slot as our last meeting.
Let me review the title and description.
And I'm just going to let this run.
Here's what's clever about this. I never
said Austin's full name, but Spark knew
to search my Gmail, find the right
Austin, read the thread for context,
check my calendar to reuse the time slot
from our last meeting, and then draft
the whole invite for my approval. And
this is something you'll notice
throughout the whole video. Gemini Spark
pulling the right context from across my
workspace and taking action on my
behalf. If you're still typing all your
prompts, by the way, I highly recommend
using a voicetoext tool like today's
sponsor, Whisper Flow, to become more
effective with AI. So, most people think
these tools just save time. And while
that's true, the real benefit is that
you naturally give AI way more detail
than you'd ever bother typing. And since
context is the most important input,
your output improves drastically. I've
tried a lot of these tools and Whisper
Flow is the fastest and most accurate
one by far. For example, watch what
happens when I ramble and make mistakes.
I just hit a quick shortcut to start.
Um, two things. First, Gemini Spark is
the advanced one. Wait, no,
the beginner one, and second, Codeex is
the advanced one. Hit the shortcut
again, and boom. As you can see, Whisper
Flow cleaned up my mistakes and
formatted everything for me. And if I
bring up my Whisper Flow dashboard,
you'll see that I've been using this
regularly since December of last year.
87% of my usage has been for AI prompts.
And not to brag, but ever since I added
the top 2% ranking here to my dating
profile, I've been getting matches like
crazy. Anyway, click the link below for
a free month of the pro plan. Thank you
Whisflow for sponsoring this video.
Moving on to capability number two,
follow your templates. Going back to the
Spark OS folder I asked you to create,
add another folder inside called Spark
templates. Create an empty Google Doc.
And I'll paste in a weekly report
template I built ahead of time. And I'll
name this weekly report template. I'll
leave a link to all these templates down
below. Then back in Gemini Spark, I'm
going to attach an intake document where
the sales teams have added their long
and very messy updates. And I just say,
I just received this week's updates from
the sales teams. Turn them into a
leadership brief that follows the weekly
report template from the Spark templates
folder.
And we're just going to send this off.
And after a few minutes, you can see
that Spark has pulled all the raw
updates from the intake document and
distilled the key details into a clean
leadership brief. The bigger takeaway
here is to find the work you do over and
over, build a template for it once, and
just point Spark at the template, and it
produces a consistent deliverable every
time without you having to reexplain
anything. By the way, at the end of the
video, I'll show you how to teach Gemini
Spark to follow your preferences for any
work that you do, not just matching the
format on one deliverable. All right,
capability number three, create
repeating playbooks using the skills
feature. So, just now we saw Spark
transform messy notes into a structured
brief using a template. We can now take
this a step further by first going into
our Spark OS folder and creating another
99_temp folder. Then in the same chat
that produced a report, I can tell Spark
create a weekly report skill that finds
the latest data entry in my weekly
report intake doc and rewrite it to
match the weekly report template in the
Spark templates folder. And always save
the output in the 99_Temp folder. Before
you save the skill, restate my goal and
show me the steps so I can approve them
first. and let me send this off and
we'll see what happens. Spark's going to
first repeat its understanding of my
goal, then propose a plan for me to
review. And after I approve it, Spark's
going to create a weekly report skill
that shows up under the skills tab on
the left. And so the next time the sales
team updates the intake document, I can
just open up a new chat, type forward
slash, and pick the skill to generate a
new report that follows the same
structure without me having to explain
all the steps. As you can see, a skill
is basically a fixed set of instructions
that turns the same kind of input into
the same kind of output where only the
content changes. Think of a waffle iron.
Whatever batter you pour in, normal or
chocolate, you get the same waffle out.
I mean, chocolate is obviously better,
but you get my point. Your input is the
batter, the skill is the iron, and the
output is the waffle. Taking this
further still, let's say I want to make
an edit to the skill. I can just say
something like edit the weekly report
generator skill so that it shows the
bottom line in chat for me to review.
And after a minute or two, Spark is just
going to go ahead and update the skill
directly. Now that you understand how
skills work, I'll link my exact inbox
zero skill down below in the description
for you to download. And after you
download it, you can just double click
to unzip it to get the skill.md file. Go
back into your Gemini Spark. Go to
skills, click upload skill, and just
drag the skill.md in. And after a couple
of seconds here, it's going to upload
successfully.
And we're going to click create to
confirm. Now, when you run that skill,
you'll notice that it follows my
preferences when it comes to formatting
and labels, and that's by design because
the fastest way for you to learn is to
tailor an existing skill to fit your
workflow. So, go ahead and just start
playing around with it. Pro tip, if you
created your own skill and want to share
it with a teammate, just go to three
dots, download, and they will just
upload the skill in the exact same way.
By the way, if you want to boost your
Google Workspace productivity by 1%
every week, you can sign up for my
weekly newsletter to receive a bite-siz
tip you can apply in under 60 seconds.
Link down below. Next, capability number
four, automating your routines with
scheduled tasks. In a nutshell, a skill
still requires you to explicitly run it
while a scheduled task runs on its own,
either at a set time, a timebased
trigger, or when something happens, an
eventbased trigger. Going back to our
weekly report workflow, since the sales
team always updates the intake document
by Friday afternoon every week, it makes
sense to create a schedule task around
this. So, I tell Spark, create a
schedule task that runs the weekly
report skill every Monday at 9:30 a.m.
And we're going to send this off and see
what happens. Once Spark confirms the
weekly task has been created, we can
head on over to the schedules tab on the
left to check that yes, this is a
timebased schedule task running the
weekly report skill every Monday at 9:30
a.m. And we can even test it out right
now by clicking the three dots and
hitting run. Moving on to an eventbased
example, since I use Gemini for
notetaking, I receive an autogenerated
meeting transcript from
geminotes@google.com
after every meeting. And so I can tell
Spark whenever I receive an email from
geminiotes@google.com
analyze the meeting transcript in full
brief me using the bottomline upfront
format and draft a recap email to the
attendees if once warranted and Spark
will then build an event trigger
scheduled task. Once that's done, Spark
will now just silently sit there
watching for that transcript email. And
the moment it lands, it reads the notes,
briefs me on the decisions and action
items, and drafts the recap. Pro tip:
Event triggers like this one are created
by talking to Gemini directly and not
through the manual schedule builder,
which only does timebased schedules for
now. At this point, you might be curious
how Gemini Spark stacks up to its peers.
First, I'm going to oversimplify a bit,
but Gemini Spark is definitely the most
beginner friendly option since it's
already embedded in the tools you
already use like Gmail, Google Calendar,
and Google Drive. So, it requires the
least amount of setup. Furthermore, and
this is a massive advantage, unlike all
the other systems, Gemini Spark runs
completely on the cloud, meaning these
scheduled tasks, well, I guess all tasks
in Gemini Spark can fire when my laptop
is off, which is not possible in Cloud
Co-work, Cloud Code, and Codeex. On the
flip side, if you open the connected
apps page, you'll see that there aren't
that many external tools Spark can plug
into yet, which is a real weakness since
an agent's whole job is taking action
for you in the tools that you use. I
mean, just compare the lack of options
here with all these options in Claude as
an example. And there's one more issue
to bring up. Sorry, Google. I love you
guys, but I have to be fair here. Since
we can't pick the model that Spark uses,
I found the output is sometimes
inconsistent. But this should be a
fairly easy fix. Just let us pick the
model. Next, claude co-work is the
intermediate option since it's friendly
towards non-technical users, but still
gives us a lot of control. For example,
my co-work system contains this
memory.md document. So, I can explicitly
control what co-work knows about me. For
example, instead of being an assistant
to the office manager, I can be the
assistant office manager. Gemini Spark,
however, is a black box in that if you
ask, "Hey, where can I see all the
information you know about me?" It gives
you a vague, unhelpful answer, and you
just have to trust it's remembering the
right things about you. Claude Code and
Codeex are the most powerful by far, but
to get the most out of these two tools,
you would need to have a
technical/coding background. No matter
which one you pick though, all these
agents only work as well as your
workspace architecture, aka how your
files and folders are organized. For
instance, my entire co-work system lives
in just one folder, organized by the
different areas of my life, and this
allows me to quickly load the relevant
context. And therefore, co-work gives me
better answers and uses far fewer
tokens. If you want to learn more about
my co-work system, I'll leave a link to
my free co-work toolkit down below. Once
you get comfortable with Gemini Spark,
here's how you can start building a
system. Start a new chat and say,
"Create a Google doc called Spark.mmd in
my Spark OS folder to store all my Spark
workspace rules. Add two rules for now.
A communication rule to always lead with
the bottom line up front, followed by
supporting details, and a file rule to
save every file you generate to my 99
folder by default.
And a minute later, the doc shows up in
my Spark OS folder with those two rules
written in. Now, watch what I can do. I
tell Spark, compare Google's AI strategy
against Microsoft's and read Spark.mmd
before responding. And after a minute or
so, the answer comes back bottom line up
first because Spark followed the rules
from the Spark.m MD document. I'm going
to stop here to avoid overwhelming you.
But the broader principle is if you
don't want to rely on Spark's blackbox
memory, you can force it to follow your
preferences every time by pointing it at
a file you control, which is exactly how
Cloud Co-work, Cloud Code, and Codeex
work. Although we can't force Spark to
read the Spark.md document automatically
just yet, I have a feeling it's coming
based on my interview with Josh
Woodward, who's head of Gemini at
Google. And the way you describe Gemini
Spark is it sort of works automatically
in the background. People don't really
need to touch it.
>> Yeah.
>> Is there going to be an option for power
users to inject their own sort of
control for Gemini Spark over the long
term?
>> Absolutely. So, kind of figuring out the
right way to present all that, but
definitely imagine you're going to be
able to customize both on the more kind
of traditional MD side as well as the
skills side.
>> If you found this helpful, you might
want to check out my AI playlist next.
See you on the next video. In the
meantime, have a great one.